###############################################
XXX  Chapter 15. Internal Commands and Builtins
###############################################

A *builtin* is a **command** contained within the Bash tool set,
literally *built in* . This is either for performance reasons --
builtins execute faster than external commands, which usually require
*forking off* ` [1]  <internal.html#FTN.AEN8607>`__ a separate process
-- or because a particular builtin needs direct access to the shell
internals.



When a command or the shell itself initiates (or *spawns* ) a new
subprocess to carry out a task, this is called *forking* . This new
process is the *child* , and the process that *forked* it off is the
*parent* . While the *child process* is doing its work, the *parent
process* is still executing.

Note that while a *parent process* gets the *process ID* of the *child
process* , and can thus pass arguments to it, *the reverse is not true*
. `This can create problems that are subtle and hard to track
down. <gotchas.html#PARCHILDPROBREF>`__


Exemple 1. A script that spawns multiple instances of itself
============================================================


.. code-block:: sh

    #!/bin/bash
    # spawn.sh


    PIDS=$(pidof sh $0)  # Process IDs of the various instances of this script.
    P_array=( $PIDS )    # Put them in an array (why?).
    echo $PIDS           # Show process IDs of parent and child processes.
    let "instances = ${#P_array[*]} - 1"  # Count elements, less 1.
                                          # Why subtract 1?
    echo "$instances instance(s) of this script running."
    echo "[Hit Ctl-C to exit.]"; echo


    sleep 1              # Wait.
    sh $0                # Play it again, Sam.

    exit 0               # Not necessary; script will never get to here.
                         # Why not?

    #  After exiting with a Ctl-C,
    #+ do all the spawned instances of the script die?
    #  If so, why?

    # Note:
    # ----
    # Be careful not to run this script too long.
    # It will eventually eat up too many system resources.

    #  Is having a script spawn multiple instances of itself
    #+ an advisable scripting technique.
    #  Why or why not?




Generally, a Bash *builtin* does not fork a subprocess when it executes
within a script. An external system command or filter in a script
usually *will* fork a subprocess.



.. code-block:: sh

    #!/bin/bash
    # spawn.sh


    PIDS=$(pidof sh $0)  # Process IDs of the various instances of this script.
    P_array=( $PIDS )    # Put them in an array (why?).
    echo $PIDS           # Show process IDs of parent and child processes.
    let "instances = ${#P_array[*]} - 1"  # Count elements, less 1.
                                          # Why subtract 1?
    echo "$instances instance(s) of this script running."
    echo "[Hit Ctl-C to exit.]"; echo


    sleep 1              # Wait.
    sh $0                # Play it again, Sam.

    exit 0               # Not necessary; script will never get to here.
                         # Why not?

    #  After exiting with a Ctl-C,
    #+ do all the spawned instances of the script die?
    #  If so, why?

    # Note:
    # ----
    # Be careful not to run this script too long.
    # It will eventually eat up too many system resources.

    #  Is having a script spawn multiple instances of itself
    #+ an advisable scripting technique.
    #  Why or why not?


.. code-block:: sh

    #!/bin/bash
    # spawn.sh


    PIDS=$(pidof sh $0)  # Process IDs of the various instances of this script.
    P_array=( $PIDS )    # Put them in an array (why?).
    echo $PIDS           # Show process IDs of parent and child processes.
    let "instances = ${#P_array[*]} - 1"  # Count elements, less 1.
                                          # Why subtract 1?
    echo "$instances instance(s) of this script running."
    echo "[Hit Ctl-C to exit.]"; echo


    sleep 1              # Wait.
    sh $0                # Play it again, Sam.

    exit 0               # Not necessary; script will never get to here.
                         # Why not?

    #  After exiting with a Ctl-C,
    #+ do all the spawned instances of the script die?
    #  If so, why?

    # Note:
    # ----
    # Be careful not to run this script too long.
    # It will eventually eat up too many system resources.

    #  Is having a script spawn multiple instances of itself
    #+ an advisable scripting technique.
    #  Why or why not?



A builtin may be a synonym to a system command of the same name, but
Bash reimplements it internally. For example, the Bash **echo** command
is not the same as ``      /bin/echo     `` , although their behavior is
almost identical.


.. code-block:: sh

    #!/bin/bash

    echo "This line uses the \"echo\" builtin."
    /bin/echo "This line uses the /bin/echo system command."

.. _internal_keyword:

Keyword
-------

A *keyword* is a *reserved* word, token or operator. Keywords have a
special meaning to the shell, and indeed are the building blocks of the
shell's syntax. As examples, *for* , *while* , *do* , and *!* are
keywords. Similar to a `builtin <internal.html#BUILTINREF>`__ , a
keyword is hard-coded into Bash, but unlike a *builtin* , a keyword is
not in itself a command, but *a subunit of a command construct* . ` [2]
<internal.html#FTN.AEN8650>`__


I/O
===

echo
----

    prints (to ``         stdout        `` ) an expression or variable
    (see `Example 4-1 <varsubn.html#EX9>`__ ).


    .. code-block:: sh

        echo Hello
        echo $a



    An **echo** requires the ``         -e        `` option to print
    escaped characters. See `Example
    5-2 <escapingsection.html#ESCAPED>`__ .

    Normally, each **echo** command prints a terminal newline, but the
    ``         -n        `` option suppresses this.



Note

    An **echo** can be used to feed a sequence of commands down a pipe.

.. code-block:: sh

        if echo "$VAR" | gre
    p -q txt   # if [[ $VAR
    = *txt* ]]
        then
          echo "$VAR contain
    s the substring sequence
     \"txt\""
        fi



    .. code-block:: sh

        if echo "$VAR"grep -q txt   # if [[ $VAR = *txt* ]]
        then
          echo "$VAR contains the substring sequence \"txt\""
        fi


    .. code-block:: sh

        if echo "$VAR"grep -q txt   # if [[ $VAR = *txt* ]]
        then
          echo "$VAR contains the substring sequence \"txt\""
        fi






Note

    An **echo** , in combination with `command
    substitution <commandsub.html#COMMANDSUBREF>`__ can set a variable.

    ``                         a=`echo           "HELLO"tr A-Z a-z`                       ``

    See also `Example 16-22 <textproc.html#LOWERCASE>`__ , `Example
    16-3 <moreadv.html#EX57>`__ , `Example
    16-47 <mathc.html#MONTHLYPMT>`__ , and `Example
    16-48 <mathc.html#BASE>`__ .




    Be aware that **echo \`command\`** deletes any linefeeds that the
    output of ``                   command                 `` generates.

    The `$IFS <internalvariables.html#IFSREF>`__ (internal field
    separator) variable normally contains \\n (linefeed) as one of its
    set of `whitespace <special-chars.html#WHITESPACEREF>`__ characters.
    Bash therefore splits the output of
    ``                   command                 `` at linefeeds into
    arguments to **echo** . Then **echo** outputs these arguments,
    separated by spaces.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ ls -l /usr/share/apps/kjezz/sounds
        -rw-r--r--    1 root     root         1407 Nov  7  2000 reflect.au
         -rw-r--r--    1 root     root          362 Nov  7  2000 seconds.au




        bash$ echo `ls -l /usr/share/apps/kjezz/sounds`
        total 40 -rw-r--r-- 1 root root 716 Nov 7 2000 reflect.au -rw-r--r-- 1 root root ...




    So, how can we embed a linefeed within an
    `echoed <internal.html#ECHOREF>`__ character string?


    .. code-block:: sh

        # Embedding a linefeed?
        echo "Why doesn't this string \n split on two lines?"
        # Doesn't split.

        # Let's try something else.

        echo

        echo $"A line of text containing
        a linefeed."
        # Prints as two distinct lines (embedded linefeed).
        # But, is the "$" variable prefix really necessary?

        echo

        echo "This string splits
        on two lines."
        # No, the "$" is not needed.

        echo
        echo "---------------"
        echo

        echo -n $"Another line of text containing
        a linefeed."
        # Prints as two distinct lines (embedded linefeed).
        # Even the -n option fails to suppress the linefeed here.

        echo
        echo
        echo "---------------"
        echo
        echo

        # However, the following doesn't work as expected.
        # Why not? Hint: Assignment to a variable.
        string1=$"Yet another line of text containing
        a linefeed (maybe)."

        echo $string1
        # Yet another line of text containing a linefeed (maybe).
        #                                    ^
        # Linefeed becomes a space.

        # Thanks, Steve Parker, for pointing this out.





Note

    This command is a shell builtin, and not the same as
    ``            /bin/echo           `` , although its behavior is
    similar.

.. code-block:: sh

        bash$ type -a echo
        echo is a shell builtin
        echo is /bin/echo




    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ type -a echo
        echo is a shell builtin
         echo is /bin/echo



    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ type -a echo
        echo is a shell builtin
         echo is /bin/echo





printf
------

    The **printf** , formatted print, command is an enhanced **echo** .
    It is a limited variant of the *C* language
    ``         printf()        `` library function, and its syntax is
    somewhat different.

    **printf** ``                   format-string                 `` ...
    ``                   parameter                 `` ...

    This is the Bash *builtin* version of the
    ``         /bin/printf        `` or
    ``         /usr/bin/printf        `` command. See the **printf**
    `manpage <basic.html#MANREF>`__ (of the system command) for in-depth
    coverage.



Caution

    Older versions of Bash may not support **printf** .





Exemple 2. *printf* in action
=============================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # printf demo

        declare -r PI=3.14159265358979     # Read-only variable, i.e., a constant.
        declare -r DecimalConstant=31373

        Message1="Greetings,"
        Message2="Earthling."

        echo

        printf "Pi to 2 decimal places = %1.2f" $PI
        echo
        printf "Pi to 9 decimal places = %1.9f" $PI  # It even rounds off correctly.

        printf "\n"                                  # Prints a line feed,
                                                     # Equivalent to 'echo' . . .

        printf "Constant = \t%d\n" $DecimalConstant  # Inserts tab (\t).

        printf "%s %s \n" $Message1 $Message2

        echo

        # ==========================================#
        # Simulation of C function, sprintf().
        # Loading a variable with a formatted string.

        echo

        Pi12=$(printf "%1.12f" $PI)
        echo "Pi to 12 decimal places = $Pi12"      # Roundoff error!

        Msg=`printf "%s %s \n" $Message1 $Message2`
        echo $Msg; echo $Msg

        #  As it happens, the 'sprintf' function can now be accessed
        #+ as a loadable module to Bash,
        #+ but this is not portable.

        exit 0




    Formatting error messages is a useful application of **printf**


    .. code-block:: sh

        E_BADDIR=85

        var=nonexistent_directory

        error()
        {
          printf "$@" >&2
          # Formats positional params passed, and sends them to stderr.
          echo
          exit $E_BADDIR
        }

        cd $var |error $"Can't cd to %s." "$var"

        # Thanks, S.C.



    See also `Example 36-17 <assortedtips.html#PROGRESSBAR>`__ .

read
----

    "Reads" the value of a variable from ``         stdin        `` ,
    that is, interactively fetches input from the keyboard. The
    ``         -a        `` option lets **read** get array variables
    (see `Example 27-6 <arrays.html#EX67>`__ ).


.. _internal_variableassignwithread:

Exemple 3. Variable assignment, using *read*
============================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # "Reading" variables.

        echo -n "Enter the value of variable 'var1': "
        # The -n option to echo suppresses newline.

        read var1
        # Note no '$' in front of var1, since it is being set.

        echo "var1 = $var1"


        echo

        # A single 'read' statement can set multiple variables.
        echo -n "Enter the values of variables 'var2' and 'var3' "
        echo =n "(separated by a space or tab): "
        read var2 var3
        echo "var2 = $var2      var3 = $var3"
        #  If you input only one value,
        #+ the other variable(s) will remain unset (null).

        exit 0




    A **read** without an associated variable assigns its input to the
    dedicated variable `$REPLY <internalvariables.html#REPLYREF>`__ .


Exemple 4. What happens when *read* has no variable
===================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # read-novar.sh

        echo

        # -------------------------- #
        echo -n "Enter a value: "
        read var
        echo "\"var\" = "$var""
        # Everything as expected here.
        # -------------------------- #

        echo

        # ------------------------------------------------------------------- #
        echo -n "Enter another value: "
        read           #  No variable supplied for 'read', therefore...
                       #+ Input to 'read' assigned to default variable, $REPLY.
        var="$REPLY"
        echo "\"var\" = "$var""
        # This is equivalent to the first code block.
        # ------------------------------------------------------------------- #

        echo
        echo "========================="
        echo


        #  This example is similar to the "reply.sh" script.
        #  However, this one shows that $REPLY is available
        #+ even after a 'read' to a variable in the conventional way.


        # ================================================================= #

        #  In some instances, you might wish to discard the first value read.
        #  In such cases, simply ignore the $REPLY variable.

        { # Code block.
        read            # Line 1, to be discarded.
        read line2      # Line 2, saved in variable.
          } <$0
        echo "Line 2 of this script is:"
        echo "$line2"   #   # read-novar.sh
        echo            #   #!/bin/bash  line discarded.

        # See also the soundcard-on.sh script.

        exit 0




    Normally, inputting a ``                   \                 ``
    suppresses a newline during input to a **read** . The
    ``         -r        `` option causes an inputted
    ``                   \                 `` to be interpreted
    literally.


Exemple 5. Multi-line input to *read*
=====================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        echo

        echo "Enter a string terminated by a \\, then press <ENTER>."
        echo "Then, enter a second string (no \\ this time), and again press <ENTER>."

        read var1     # The "\" suppresses the newline, when reading $var1.
                      #     first line \
                      #     second line

        echo "var1 = $var1"
        #     var1 = first line second line

        #  For each line terminated by a "\"
        #+ you get a prompt on the next line to continue feeding characters into var1.

        echo; echo

        echo "Enter another string terminated by a \\ , then press <ENTER>."
        read -r var2  # The -r option causes the "\" to be read literally.
                      #     first line \

        echo "var2 = $var2"
        #     var2 = first line \

        # Data entry terminates with the first <ENTER>.

        echo

        exit 0




    The **read** command has some interesting options that permit
    echoing a prompt and even reading keystrokes without hitting
    **ENTER** .


    .. code-block:: sh

        # Read a keypress without hitting ENTER.

        read -s -n1 -p "Hit a key " keypress
        echo; echo "Keypress was "\"$keypress\""."

        # -s option means do not echo input.
        # -n N option means accept only N characters of input.
        # -p option means echo the following prompt before reading input.

        # Using these options is tricky, since they need to be in the correct order.



    The ``         -n        `` option to **read** also allows detection
    of the **arrow keys** and certain of the other unusual keys.


Exemple 6. Detecting the arrow keys
===================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # arrow-detect.sh: Detects the arrow keys, and a few more.
        # Thank you, Sandro Magi, for showing me how.

        # --------------------------------------------
        # Character codes generated by the keypresses.
        arrowup='\[A'
        arrowdown='\[B'
        arrowrt='\[C'
        arrowleft='\[D'
        insert='\[2'
        delete='\[3'
        # --------------------------------------------

        SUCCESS=0
        OTHER=65

        echo -n "Press a key...  "
        # May need to also press ENTER if a key not listed above pressed.
        read -n3 key                      # Read 3 characters.

        echo -n "$key"grep "$arrowup"  #Check if character code detected.
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "Up-arrow key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi

        echo -n "$key"grep "$arrowdown"
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "Down-arrow key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi

        echo -n "$key"grep "$arrowrt"
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "Right-arrow key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi

        echo -n "$key"grep "$arrowleft"
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "Left-arrow key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi

        echo -n "$key"grep "$insert"
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "\"Insert\" key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi

        echo -n "$key"grep "$delete"
        if [ "$?" -eq $SUCCESS ]
        then
          echo "\"Delete\" key pressed."
          exit $SUCCESS
        fi


        echo " Some other key pressed."

        exit $OTHER

        # ========================================= #

        #  Mark Alexander came up with a simplified
        #+ version of the above script (Thank you!).
        #  It eliminates the need for grep.

        #!/bin/bash

          uparrow=$'\x1b[A'
          downarrow=$'\x1b[B'
          leftarrow=$'\x1b[D'
          rightarrow=$'\x1b[C'

          read -s -n3 -p "Hit an arrow key: " x

          case "$x" in
          $uparrow)
             echo "You pressed up-arrow"
             ;;
          $downarrow)
             echo "You pressed down-arrow"
             ;;
          $leftarrow)
             echo "You pressed left-arrow"
             ;;
          $rightarrow)
             echo "You pressed right-arrow"
             ;;
          esac

        exit $?

        # ========================================= #

        # Antonio Macchi has a simpler alternative.

        #!/bin/bash

        while true
        do
          read -sn1 a
          test "$a" == `echo -en "\e"`.. continue::
          read -sn1 a
          test "$a" == "[".. continue::
          read -sn1 a
          case "$a" in
            A)  echo "up";;
            B)  echo "down";;
            C)  echo "right";;
            D)  echo "left";;
          esac
        done

        # ========================================= #

        #  Exercise:
        #  --------
        #  1) Add detection of the "Home," "End," "PgUp," and "PgDn" keys.






Note

    The ``            -n           `` option to **read** will not detect
    the **ENTER** (newline) key.




    The ``         -t        `` option to **read** permits timed input
    (see `Example 9-4 <internalvariables.html#TOUT>`__ and `Example
    A-41 <contributed-scripts.html#QKY>`__ ).

    The ``         -u        `` option takes the `file
    descriptor <io-redirection.html#FDREF>`__ of the target file.

    The **read** command may also "read" its variable value from a file
    `redirected <io-redirection.html#IOREDIRREF>`__ to
    ``         stdin        `` . If the file contains more than one
    line, only the first line is assigned to the variable. If **read**
    has more than one parameter, then each of these variables gets
    assigned a successive
    `whitespace-delineated <special-chars.html#WHITESPACEREF>`__ string.
    Caution!


Exemple 7. Using *read* with `file redirection <io-redirection.html#IOREDIRREF>`__
==================================================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        read var1 <data-file
        echo "var1 = $var1"
        # var1 set to the entire first line of the input file "data-file"

        read var2 var3 <data-file
        echo "var2 = $var2   var3 = $var3"
        # Note non-intuitive behavior of "read" here.
        # 1) Rewinds back to the beginning of input file.
        # 2) Each variable is now set to a corresponding string,
        #    separated by whitespace, rather than to an entire line of text.
        # 3) The final variable gets the remainder of the line.
        # 4) If there are more variables to be set than whitespace-terminated strings
        #    on the first line of the file, then the excess variables remain empty.

        echo "------------------------------------------------"

        # How to resolve the above problem with a loop:
        while read line
        do
          echo "$line"
        done <data-file
        # Thanks, Heiner Steven for pointing this out.

        echo "------------------------------------------------"

        # Use $IFS (Internal Field Separator variable) to split a line of input to
        # "read", if you do not want the default to be whitespace.

        echo "List of all users:"
        OIFS=$IFS; IFS=:       # /etc/passwd uses ":" for field separator.
        while read name passwd uid gid fullname ignore
        do
          echo "$name ($fullname)"
        done </etc/passwd   # I/O redirection.
        IFS=$OIFS              # Restore original $IFS.
        # This code snippet also by Heiner Steven.



        #  Setting the $IFS variable within the loop itself
        #+ eliminates the need for storing the original $IFS
        #+ in a temporary variable.
        #  Thanks, Dim Segebart, for pointing this out.
        echo "------------------------------------------------"
        echo "List of all users:"

        while IFS=: read name passwd uid gid fullname ignore
        do
          echo "$name ($fullname)"
        done </etc/passwd   # I/O redirection.

        echo
        echo "\$IFS still $IFS"

        exit 0






Note

    `Piping <special-chars.html#PIPEREF>`__ output to a *read* , using
    `echo <internal.html#ECHOREF>`__ to set variables `will
    fail <gotchas.html#BADREAD0>`__ .

    Yet, piping the output of `cat <basic.html#CATREF>`__ *seems* to
    work.

.. code-block:: sh

    cat file1 file2 |
    while read line
    do
    echo $line
    done


    However, as Bjรถn Eriksson shows:


Exemple 7. Problems reading from a pipe
=======================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/sh
        # readpipe.sh
        # This example contributed by Bjon Eriksson.

        ### shopt -s lastpipe

        last="(null)"
        cat $0
        while read line
        do
            echo "{$line}"
            last=$line
        done

        echo
        echo "++++++++++++++++++++++"
        printf "\nAll done, last: $last\n" #  The output of this line
                                           #+ changes if you uncomment line 5.
                                           #  (Bash, version -ge 4.2 required.)

        exit 0  # End of code.
                # (Partial) output of script follows.
                # The 'echo' supplies extra brackets.

        #############################################

        ./readpipe.sh

        {#!/bin/sh}
        {last="(null)"}
        {cat $0 |}
        {while read line}
        {do}
        {echo "{$line}"}
        {last=$line}
        {done}
        {printf "nAll done, last: $lastn"}


        All done, last: (null)

        The variable (last) is set within the loop/subshell
        but its value does not persist outside the loop.




    The *gendiff* script, usually found in
    ``            /usr/bin           `` on many Linux distros, pipes the
    output of `find <moreadv.html#FINDREF>`__ to a *while read*
    construct.

.. code-block:: sh

    find $1 \( -name "*$ 2" -o -name ".*$2" \) -print |
    while read f; do
    . . .



    .. code-block:: sh

        cat file1 file2
        while read line
        do
        echo $line
        done


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/sh
        # readpipe.sh
        # This example contributed by Bjon Eriksson.

        ### shopt -s lastpipe

        last="(null)"
        cat $0
        while read line
        do
            echo "{$line}"
            last=$line
        done

        echo
        echo "++++++++++++++++++++++"
        printf "\nAll done, last: $last\n" #  The output of this line
                                           #+ changes if you uncomment line 5.
                                           #  (Bash, version -ge 4.2 required.)

        exit 0  # End of code.
                # (Partial) output of script follows.
                # The 'echo' supplies extra brackets.

        #############################################

        ./readpipe.sh

        {#!/bin/sh}
        {last="(null)"}
        {cat $0 |}
        {while read line}
        {do}
        {echo "{$line}"}
        {last=$line}
        {done}
        {printf "nAll done, last: $lastn"}


        All done, last: (null)

        The variable (last) is set within the loop/subshell
        but its value does not persist outside the loop.


    .. code-block:: sh

        find $1 \( -name "*$2" -o -name ".*$2" \) -print
        while read f; do
        . . .


    .. code-block:: sh

        cat file1 file2
        while read line
        do
        echo $line
        done


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/sh
        # readpipe.sh
        # This example contributed by Bjon Eriksson.

        ### shopt -s lastpipe

        last="(null)"
        cat $0
        while read line
        do
            echo "{$line}"
            last=$line
        done

        echo
        echo "++++++++++++++++++++++"
        printf "\nAll done, last: $last\n" #  The output of this line
                                           #+ changes if you uncomment line 5.
                                           #  (Bash, version -ge 4.2 required.)

        exit 0  # End of code.
                # (Partial) output of script follows.
                # The 'echo' supplies extra brackets.

        #############################################

        ./readpipe.sh

        {#!/bin/sh}
        {last="(null)"}
        {cat $0 |}
        {while read line}
        {do}
        {echo "{$line}"}
        {last=$line}
        {done}
        {printf "nAll done, last: $lastn"}


        All done, last: (null)

        The variable (last) is set within the loop/subshell
        but its value does not persist outside the loop.


    .. code-block:: sh

        find $1 \( -name "*$2" -o -name ".*$2" \) -print
        while read f; do
        . . .






Tip

    It is possible to *paste* text into the input field of a *read* (but
    *not* multiple lines!). See `Example
    A-38 <contributed-scripts.html#PADSW>`__ .






Filesystem
==========

cd
--

    The familiar **cd** change directory command finds use in scripts
    where execution of a command requires being in a specified
    directory.


    .. code-block:: sh

        (cd /source/directory && tar cf - . )(cd /dest/directory && tar xpvf -)



    [from the `previously cited <special-chars.html#COXEX>`__ example by
    Alan Cox]

    The ``         -P        `` (physical) option to **cd** causes it to
    ignore symbolic links.

    **cd -** changes to `$OLDPWD <internalvariables.html#OLDPWD>`__ ,
    the previous working directory.



Caution

    The **cd** command does not function as expected when presented with
    two forward slashes.

.. code-block:: sh

    bash$ cd //
    bash$ pwd
    //



    The output should, of course, be ``           /          `` . This
    is a problem both from the command-line and in a script.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ cd //
        bash$ pwd
        //



    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ cd //
        bash$ pwd
        //





pwd
---

    Print Working Directory. This gives the user's (or script's) current
    directory (see `Example 15-9 <internal.html#EX37>`__ ). The effect
    is identical to reading the value of the builtin variable
    `$PWD <internalvariables.html#PWDREF>`__ .

pushd , **popd** , **dirs**
---------------------------

    This command set is a mechanism for bookmarking working directories,
    a means of moving back and forth through directories in an orderly
    manner. A pushdown `stack <internalvariables.html#STACKDEFREF>`__ is
    used to keep track of directory names. Options allow various
    manipulations of the directory stack.

    ``                   pushd           dir-name                 ``
    pushes the path ``                   dir-name                 ``
    onto the directory stack (to the *top* of the stack) and
    simultaneously changes the current working directory to
    ``                   dir-name                 ``

    **popd** removes (pops) the top directory path name off the
    directory stack and simultaneously changes the current working
    directory to the directory now at the *top* of the stack.

    **dirs** lists the contents of the directory stack (compare this
    with the `$DIRSTACK <internalvariables.html#DIRSTACKREF>`__
    variable). A successful **pushd** or **popd** will automatically
    invoke **dirs** .

    Scripts that require various changes to the current working
    directory without hard-coding the directory name changes can make
    good use of these commands. Note that the implicit
    ``         $DIRSTACK        `` array variable, accessible from
    within a script, holds the contents of the directory stack.


Exemple 8. Changing the current working directory
=================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        dir1=/usr/local
        dir2=/var/spool

        pushd $dir1
        # Will do an automatic 'dirs' (list directory stack to stdout).
        echo "Now in directory `pwd`." # Uses back-quoted 'pwd'.

        # Now, do some stuff in directory 'dir1'.
        pushd $dir2
        echo "Now in directory `pwd`."

        # Now, do some stuff in directory 'dir2'.
        echo "The top entry in the DIRSTACK array is $DIRSTACK."
        popd
        echo "Now back in directory `pwd`."

        # Now, do some more stuff in directory 'dir1'.
        popd
        echo "Now back in original working directory `pwd`."

        exit 0

        # What happens if you don't 'popd' -- then exit the script?
        # Which directory do you end up in? Why?






Variables
=========

let
---

    The **let** command carries out *arithmetic* operations on
    variables. ` [3]  <internal.html#FTN.AEN9009>`__ In many cases, it
    functions as a less complex version of
    `expr <moreadv.html#EXPRREF>`__ .


Exemple 9. Letting *let* do arithmetic.
=======================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        echo

        let a=11            # Same as 'a=11'
        let a=a+5           # Equivalent to  let "a = a + 5"
                            # (Double quotes and spaces make it more readable.)
        echo "11 + 5 = $a"  # 16

        let "a <<= 3"       # Equivalent to  let "a = a << 3"
        echo "\"\$a\" (=16) left-shifted 3 places = $a"
                            # 128

        let "a /= 4"        # Equivalent to  let "a = a / 4"
        echo "128 / 4 = $a" # 32

        let "a -= 5"        # Equivalent to  let "a = a - 5"
        echo "32 - 5 = $a"  # 27

        let "a *=  10"      # Equivalent to  let "a = a * 10"
        echo "27 * 10 = $a" # 270

        let "a %= 8"        # Equivalent to  let "a = a % 8"
        echo "270 modulo 8 = $a  (270 / 8 = 33, remainder $a)"
                            # 6


        # Does "let" permit C-style operators?
        # Yes, just as the (( ... )) double-parentheses construct does.

        let a++             # C-style (post) increment.
        echo "6++ = $a"     # 6++ = 7
        let a--             # C-style decrement.
        echo "7-- = $a"     # 7-- = 6
        # Of course, ++a, etc., also allowed . . .
        echo


        # Trinary operator.

        # Note that $a is 6, see above.
        let "t = a<7?7:11"   # True
        echo $t  # 7

        let a++
        let "t = a<7?7:11"   # False
        echo $t  #     11

        exit






Caution

    The *let* command can, in certain contexts, return a surprising
    `exit status <exit-status.html#EXITSTATUSREF>`__ .

.. code-block:: sh

    # Evgeniy Ivanov poi nts out:

    var=0
    echo $?     # 0
                # As exp ected.

    let var++
    echo $?     # 1
                # The co mmand was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???
                # Anomal y!

    let var++
    echo $?     # 0
                # As exp ected.


    # Likewise . . .

    let var=0
    echo $?     # 1
                # The co mmand was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???

    #  However, as Jeff Gorak points out, #+ this is part of t he design spec for 'let' . . .
    # "If the last ARG e valuates to 0, let retur ns 1;
    #  let returns 0 oth erwise." ['help let']



    .. code-block:: sh

        # Evgeniy Ivanov points out:

        var=0
        echo $?     # 0
                    # As expected.

        let var++
        echo $?     # 1
                    # The command was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???
                    # Anomaly!

        let var++
        echo $?     # 0
                    # As expected.


        # Likewise . . .

        let var=0
        echo $?     # 1
                    # The command was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???

        #  However, as Jeff Gorak points out,
        #+ this is part of the design spec for 'let' . . .
        # "If the last ARG evaluates to 0, let returns 1;
        #  let returns 0 otherwise." ['help let']


    .. code-block:: sh

        # Evgeniy Ivanov points out:

        var=0
        echo $?     # 0
                    # As expected.

        let var++
        echo $?     # 1
                    # The command was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???
                    # Anomaly!

        let var++
        echo $?     # 0
                    # As expected.


        # Likewise . . .

        let var=0
        echo $?     # 1
                    # The command was successful, so why isn't $?=0 ???

        #  However, as Jeff Gorak points out,
        #+ this is part of the design spec for 'let' . . .
        # "If the last ARG evaluates to 0, let returns 1;
        #  let returns 0 otherwise." ['help let']




eval
----

    ``                   eval arg1 [arg2] ... [argN]                 ``

    Combines the arguments in an expression or list of expressions and
    ``                   evaluates                 `` them. Any
    variables within the expression are expanded. The net result is to
    **convert a string into a command** .



Tip

    The **eval** command can be used for code generation from the
    command-line or within a script.





    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ command_string="ps ax"
        bash$ process="ps ax"
        bash$ eval "$command_string"grep "$process"
        26973 pts/3    R+     0:00 grep --color ps ax
         26974 pts/3    R+     0:00 ps ax




    Each invocation of *eval* forces a re- *evaluation* of its
    arguments.


    .. code-block:: sh

        a='$b'
        b='$c'
        c=d

        echo $a             # $b
                            # First level.
        eval echo $a        # $c
                            # Second level.
        eval eval echo $a   # d
                            # Third level.

        # Thank you, E. Choroba.




Exemple 10. Showing the effect of *eval*
========================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # Exercising "eval" ...

        y=`eval ls -l`  #  Similar to y=`ls -l`
        echo $y         #+ but linefeeds removed because "echoed" variable is unquoted.
        echo
        echo "$y"       #  Linefeeds preserved when variable is quoted.

        echo; echo

        y=`eval df`     #  Similar to y=`df`
        echo $y         #+ but linefeeds removed.

        #  When LF's not preserved, it may make it easier to parse output,
        #+ using utilities such as "awk".

        echo
        echo "==========================================================="
        echo

        eval "`seq 3sed -e 's/.*/echo var&=ABCDEFGHIJ/'`"
        # var1=ABCDEFGHIJ
        # var2=ABCDEFGHIJ
        # var3=ABCDEFGHIJ

        echo
        echo "==========================================================="
        echo


        # Now, showing how to do something useful with "eval" . . .
        # (Thank you, E. Choroba!)

        version=3.4     #  Can we split the version into major and minor
                        #+ part in one command?
        echo "version = $version"
        eval major=${version/./;minor=}     #  Replaces '.' in version by ';minor='
                                            #  The substitution yields '3; minor=4'
                                            #+ so eval does minor=4, major=3
        echo Major: $major, minor: $minor   #  Major: 3, minor: 4





Exemple 11. Using *eval* to select among variables
==================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # arr-choice.sh

        #  Passing arguments to a function to select
        #+ one particular variable out of a group.

        arr0=( 10 11 12 13 14 15 )
        arr1=( 20 21 22 23 24 25 )
        arr2=( 30 31 32 33 34 35 )
        #       0  1  2  3  4  5      Element number (zero-indexed)


        choose_array ()
        {
          eval array_member=\${arr${array_number}[element_number]}
          #                 ^       ^^^^^^^^^^^^
          #  Using eval to construct the name of a variable,
          #+ in this particular case, an array name.

          echo "Element $element_number of array $array_number is $array_member"
        } #  Function can be rewritten to take parameters.

        array_number=0    # First array.
        element_number=3
        choose_array      # 13

        array_number=2    # Third array.
        element_number=4
        choose_array      # 34

        array_number=3    # Null array (arr3 not allocated).
        element_number=4
        choose_array      # (null)

        # Thank you, Antonio Macchi, for pointing this out.





Exemple 12. *Echoing* the *command-line parameters*
===================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # echo-params.sh

        # Call this script with a few command-line parameters.
        # For example:
        #     sh echo-params.sh first second third fourth fifth

        params=$#              # Number of command-line parameters.
        param=1                # Start at first command-line param.

        while [ "$param" -le "$params" ]
        do
          echo -n "Command-line parameter "
          echo -n \$$param     #  Gives only the *name* of variable.
        #         ^^^          #  $1, $2, $3, etc.
                               #  Why?
                               #  \$ escapes the first "$"
                               #+ so it echoes literally,
                               #+ and $param dereferences "$param" . . .
                               #+ . . . as expected.
          echo -n " = "
          eval echo \$$param   #  Gives the *value* of variable.
        # ^^^^      ^^^        #  The "eval" forces the *evaluation*
                               #+ of \$$
                               #+ as an indirect variable reference.

        (( param ++ ))         # On to the next.
        done

        exit $?

        # =================================================

        $ sh echo-params.sh first second third fourth fifth
        Command-line parameter $1 = first
        Command-line parameter $2 = second
        Command-line parameter $3 = third
        Command-line parameter $4 = fourth
        Command-line parameter $5 = fifth





Exemple 13. Forcing a log-off
=============================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # Killing ppp to force a log-off.
        # For dialup connection, of course.

        # Script should be run as root user.

        SERPORT=ttyS3
        #  Depending on the hardware and even the kernel version,
        #+ the modem port on your machine may be different --
        #+ /dev/ttyS1 or /dev/ttyS2.


        killppp="eval kill -9 `ps axawk '/ppp/ { print $1 }'`"
        #                     -------- process ID of ppp -------

        $killppp                     # This variable is now a command.


        # The following operations must be done as root user.

        chmod 666 /dev/$SERPORT      # Restore r+w permissions, or else what?
        #  Since doing a SIGKILL on ppp changed the permissions on the serial port,
        #+ we restore permissions to previous state.

        rm /var/lock/LCK..$SERPORT   # Remove the serial port lock file. Why?

        exit $?

        # Exercises:
        # ---------
        # 1) Have script check whether root user is invoking it.
        # 2) Do a check on whether the process to be killed
        #+   is actually running before attempting to kill it.
        # 3) Write an alternate version of this script based on 'fuser':
        #+      if [ fuser -s /dev/modem ]; then . . .





Exemple 14. A version of *rot13*
================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # A version of "rot13" using 'eval'.
        # Compare to "rot13.sh" example.

        setvar_rot_13()              # "rot13" scrambling
        {
          local varname=$1 varvalue=$2
          eval $varname='$(echo "$varvalue"tr a-z n-za-m)'
        }


        setvar_rot_13 var "foobar"   # Run "foobar" through rot13.
        echo $var                    # sbbone

        setvar_rot_13 var "$var"     # Run "sbbone" through rot13.
                                     # Back to original variable.
        echo $var                    # foobar

        # This example by Stephane Chazelas.
        # Modified by document author.

        exit 0




    Here is another example of using *eval* to *evaluate* a complex
    expression, this one from an earlier version of YongYe's `Tetris
    game
    script <https://github.com/yongye/shell/blob/master/Tetris_Game.sh>`__
    .


    .. code-block:: sh

        eval ${1}+=\"${x} ${y} \"



    `Example A-53 <contributed-scripts.html#SAMORSE>`__ uses *eval* to
    convert `array <arrays.html#ARRAYREF>`__ elements into a command
    list.

    The *eval* command occurs in the older version of `indirect
    referencing <ivr.html#IVRREF>`__ .


    .. code-block:: sh

        eval var=\$$var





Tip

    The *eval* command can be used to `parameterize *brace
    expansion* <bashver3.html#BRACEEXPREF3>`__ .






Caution

    The **eval** command can be risky, and normally should be avoided
    when there exists a reasonable alternative. An
    ``                         eval           $COMMANDS                       ``
    executes the contents of
    ``                         COMMANDS                       `` , which
    may contain such unpleasant surprises as **rm -rf \*** . Running an
    **eval** on unfamiliar code written by persons unknown is living
    dangerously.




set
---

    The **set** command changes the value of internal script
    variables/options. One use for this is to toggle `option
    flags <options.html#OPTIONSREF>`__ which help determine the behavior
    of the script. Another application for it is to reset the
    `positional parameters <internalvariables.html#POSPARAMREF>`__ that
    a script sees as the result of a command (
    ``                   set           `command`                 `` ).
    The script can then parse the
    `fields <special-chars.html#FIELDREF>`__ of the command output.


Exemple 15. Using *set* with positional parameters
==================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # ex34.sh
        # Script "set-test"

        # Invoke this script with three command-line parameters,
        # for example, "sh ex34.sh one two three".

        echo
        echo "Positional parameters before  set \`uname -a\` :"
        echo "Command-line argument #1 = $1"
        echo "Command-line argument #2 = $2"
        echo "Command-line argument #3 = $3"


        set `uname -a` # Sets the positional parameters to the output
                       # of the command `uname -a`

        echo
        echo +++++
        echo $_        # +++++
        # Flags set in script.
        echo $-        # hB
        #                Anomalous behavior?
        echo

        echo "Positional parameters after  set \`uname -a\` :"
        # $1, $2, $3, etc. reinitialized to result of `uname -a`
        echo "Field #1 of 'uname -a' = $1"
        echo "Field #2 of 'uname -a' = $2"
        echo "Field #3 of 'uname -a' = $3"
        echo \#\#\#
        echo $_        # ###
        echo

        exit 0




    More fun with positional parameters.


Exemple 16. Reversing the positional parameters
===============================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # revposparams.sh: Reverse positional parameters.
        # Script by Dan Jacobson, with stylistic revisions by document author.


        set a\ b c d\ e;
        #     ^      ^     Spaces escaped
        #       ^ ^        Spaces not escaped
        OIFS=$IFS; IFS=:;
        #              ^   Saving old IFS and setting new one.

        echo

        until [ $# -eq 0 ]
        do          #      Step through positional parameters.
          echo "### k0 = "$k""     # Before
          k=$1:$k;  #      Append each pos param to loop variable.
        #     ^
          echo "### k = "$k""      # After
          echo
          shift;
        done

        set $k  #  Set new positional parameters.
        echo -
        echo $# #  Count of positional parameters.
        echo -
        echo

        for i   #  Omitting the "in list" sets the variable -- i --
                #+ to the positional parameters.
        do
          echo $i  # Display new positional parameters.
        done

        IFS=$OIFS  # Restore IFS.

        #  Question:
        #  Is it necessary to set an new IFS, internal field separator,
        #+ in order for this script to work properly?
        #  What happens if you don't? Try it.
        #  And, why use the new IFS -- a colon -- in line 17,
        #+ to append to the loop variable?
        #  What is the purpose of this?

        exit 0

        $ ./revposparams.sh

        ### k0 =
        ### k = a b

        ### k0 = a b
        ### k = c a b

        ### k0 = c a b
        ### k = d e c a b

        -
        3
        -

        d e
        c
        a b




    Invoking **set** without any options or arguments simply lists all
    the `environmental <othertypesv.html#ENVREF>`__ and other variables
    that have been initialized.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ set
        AUTHORCOPY=/home/bozo/posts
         BASH=/bin/bash
         BASH_VERSION=$'2.05.8(1)-release'
         ...
         XAUTHORITY=/home/bozo/.Xauthority
         _=/etc/bashrc
         variable22=abc
         variable23=xzy




    Using **set** with the ``         --        `` option explicitly
    assigns the contents of a variable to the positional parameters. If
    no variable follows the ``         --        `` it *unsets* the
    positional parameters.


Exemple 17. Reassigning the positional parameters
=================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        variable="one two three four five"

        set -- $variable
        # Sets positional parameters to the contents of "$variable".

        first_param=$1
        second_param=$2
        shift; shift        # Shift past first two positional params.
        # shift 2             also works.
        remaining_params="$*"

        echo
        echo "first parameter = $first_param"             # one
        echo "second parameter = $second_param"           # two
        echo "remaining parameters = $remaining_params"   # three four five

        echo; echo

        # Again.
        set -- $variable
        first_param=$1
        second_param=$2
        echo "first parameter = $first_param"             # one
        echo "second parameter = $second_param"           # two

        # ======================================================

        set --
        # Unsets positional parameters if no variable specified.

        first_param=$1
        second_param=$2
        echo "first parameter = $first_param"             # (null value)
        echo "second parameter = $second_param"           # (null value)

        exit 0




    See also `Example 11-2 <loops1.html#EX22A>`__ and `Example
    16-56 <extmisc.html#EX33A>`__ .

unset
-----

    The **unset** command deletes a shell variable, effectively setting
    it to *null* . Note that this command does not affect positional
    parameters.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ unset PATH

        bash$ echo $PATH

        bash$




Exemple 18. "Unsetting" a variable
==================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # unset.sh: Unsetting a variable.

        variable=hello                       #  Initialized.
        echo "variable = $variable"

        unset variable                       #  Unset.
                                             #  In this particular context,
                                             #+ same effect as:   variable=
        echo "(unset) variable = $variable"  #  $variable is null.

        if [ -z "$variable" ]                #  Try a string-length test.
        then
          echo "\$variable has zero length."
        fi

        exit 0






Note

    In most contexts, an *undeclared* variable and one that has been
    *unset* are equivalent. However, the
    `${parameter:-default} <parameter-substitution.html#UNDDR>`__
    parameter substitution construct can distinguish between the two.




export
------


    The **export** ` [4]  <internal.html#FTN.AEN9199>`__ command makes
    available variables to all child processes of the running script or
    shell. One important use of the **export** command is in `startup
    files <files.html#FILESREF1>`__ , to initialize and make accessible
    `environmental variables <othertypesv.html#ENVREF>`__ to subsequent
    user processes.



Caution

    Unfortunately, `there is no way to export variables back to the
    parent process <gotchas.html#PARCHILDPROBREF>`__ , to the process
    that called or invoked the script or shell.





Exemple 20. Using *export* to pass a variable to an embedded *awk* script
=========================================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        #  Yet another version of the "column totaler" script (col-totaler.sh)
        #+ that adds up a specified column (of numbers) in the target file.
        #  This uses the environment to pass a script variable to 'awk' . . .
        #+ and places the awk script in a variable.


        ARGS=2
        E_WRONGARGS=85

        if [ $# -ne "$ARGS" ] # Check for proper number of command-line args.
        then
           echo "Usage: `basename $0` filename column-number"
           exit $E_WRONGARGS
        fi

        filename=$1
        column_number=$2

        #===== Same as original script, up to this point =====#

        export column_number
        # Export column number to environment, so it's available for retrieval.


        # -----------------------------------------------
        awkscript='{ total += $ENVIRON["column_number"] }
        END { print total }'
        # Yes, a variable can hold an awk script.
        # -----------------------------------------------

        # Now, run the awk script.
        awk "$awkscript" "$filename"

        # Thanks, Stephane Chazelas.

        exit 0






Tip

    It is possible to initialize and export variables in the same
    operation, as in **export var1=xxx** .

    However, as Greg Keraunen points out, in certain situations this may
    have a different effect than setting a variable, then exporting it.

.. code-block:: sh

    bash$ export var=(a b); echo ${var[0]}
    (a b)



    bash$ var=(a b); exp ort var; echo ${var[0]}
    a




    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ export var=(a b); echo ${var[0]}
        (a b)



        bash$ var=(a b); export var; echo ${var[0]}
        a



    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ export var=(a b); echo ${var[0]}
        (a b)



        bash$ var=(a b); export var; echo ${var[0]}
        a







Note

    A variable to be exported may require special treatment. See
    `Example M-2 <sample-bashrc.html#BASHPROF>`__ .




declare , **typeset**
---------------------

    The `declare <declareref.html>`__ and `typeset <declareref.html>`__
    commands specify and/or restrict properties of variables.

readonly
--------

    Same as `declare -r <declareref.html>`__ , sets a variable as
    read-only, or, in effect, as a constant. Attempts to change the
    variable fail with an error message. This is the shell analog of the
    *C* language **const** type qualifier.

getopts
-------

    This powerful tool parses command-line arguments passed to the
    script. This is the Bash analog of the
    `getopt <extmisc.html#GETOPTY>`__ external command and the *getopt*
    library function familiar to *C* programmers. It permits passing and
    concatenating multiple options ` [5]  <internal.html#FTN.AEN9289>`__
    and associated arguments to a script (for example
    ``                   scriptname -abc -e           /usr/local                 ``
    ).

    The **getopts** construct uses two implicit variables.
    ``         $OPTIND        `` is the argument pointer ( *OPTion
    INDex* ) and ``         $OPTARG        `` ( *OPTion ARGument* ) the
    (optional) argument attached to an option. A colon following the
    option name in the declaration tags that option as having an
    associated argument.

    A **getopts** construct usually comes packaged in a `while
    loop <loops1.html#WHILELOOPREF>`__ , which processes the options and
    arguments one at a time, then increments the implicit
    ``         $OPTIND        `` variable to point to the next.



Note

    #. The arguments passed from the command-line to the script must be
       preceded by a dash ( ``              -             `` ). It is
       the prefixed ``              -             `` that lets
       **getopts** recognize command-line arguments as *options* . In
       fact, **getopts** will not process arguments without the prefixed
       ``              -             `` , and will terminate option
       processing at the first argument encountered lacking them.

    #. The **getopts** template differs slightly from the standard
       `while loop <loops1.html#WHILELOOPREF>`__ , in that it lacks
       condition brackets.

    #. The **getopts** construct is a highly functional replacement for
       the traditional `getopt <extmisc.html#GETOPTY>`__ external
       command.





    .. code-block:: sh

        while getopts ":abcde:fg" Option
        # Initial declaration.
        # a, b, c, d, e, f, and g are the options (flags) expected.
        # The : after option 'e' shows it will have an argument passed with it.
        do
          case $Option in
            a ) # Do something with variable 'a'.
            b ) # Do something with variable 'b'.
            ...
            e)  # Do something with 'e', and also with $OPTARG,
                # which is the associated argument passed with option 'e'.
            ...
            g ) # Do something with variable 'g'.
          esac
        done
        shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
        # Move argument pointer to next.

        # All this is not nearly as complicated as it looks <grin>.




Exemple 21. Using *getopts* to read the options/arguments passed to a script
============================================================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # ex33.sh: Exercising getopts and OPTIND
        #          Script modified 10/09/03 at the suggestion of Bill Gradwohl.


        # Here we observe how 'getopts' processes command-line arguments to script.
        # The arguments are parsed as "options" (flags) and associated arguments.

        # Try invoking this script with:
        #   'scriptname -mn'
        #   'scriptname -oq qOption' (qOption can be some arbitrary string.)
        #   'scriptname -qXXX -r'
        #
        #   'scriptname -qr'
        #+      - Unexpected result, takes "r" as the argument to option "q"
        #   'scriptname -q -r'
        #+      - Unexpected result, same as above
        #   'scriptname -mnop -mnop'  - Unexpected result
        #   (OPTIND is unreliable at stating where an option came from.)
        #
        #  If an option expects an argument ("flag:"), then it will grab
        #+ whatever is next on the command-line.

        NO_ARGS=0
        E_OPTERROR=85

        if [ $# -eq "$NO_ARGS" ]    # Script invoked with no command-line args?
        then
          echo "Usage: `basename $0` options (-mnopqrs)"
          exit $E_OPTERROR          # Exit and explain usage.
                                    # Usage: scriptname -options
                                    # Note: dash (-) necessary
        fi


        while getopts ":mnopq:rs" Option
        do
          case $Option in
            m     ) echo "Scenario #1: option -m-   [OPTIND=${OPTIND}]";;
            no ) echo "Scenario #2: option -$Option-   [OPTIND=${OPTIND}]";;
            p     ) echo "Scenario #3: option -p-   [OPTIND=${OPTIND}]";;
            q     ) echo "Scenario #4: option -q-\
                          with argument \"$OPTARG\"   [OPTIND=${OPTIND}]";;
            #  Note that option 'q' must have an associated argument,
            #+ otherwise it falls through to the default.
            rs ) echo "Scenario #5: option -$Option-";;
            *     ) echo "Unimplemented option chosen.";;   # Default.
          esac
        done

        shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
        #  Decrements the argument pointer so it points to next argument.
        #  $1 now references the first non-option item supplied on the command-line
        #+ if one exists.

        exit $?

        #   As Bill Gradwohl states,
        #  "The getopts mechanism allows one to specify:  scriptname -mnop -mnop
        #+  but there is no reliable way to differentiate what came
        #+ from where by using OPTIND."
        #  There are, however, workarounds.






Script Behavior
===============

.. _internal_dotcommand:

source
======

També anomenat comanda punt o *dot command*.

Quan invoquem aquesta comanda des de la línia de comandes, s'executa
un guió.
En canvi, dins d'un guió, ``source nomfitxer`` carrega el fitxer
*nomfitxer* de manera que el contingut d'aquest fitxer passa a formar part
del guió. Es diu que el guió *importa* el codi guardat a *nomfitxer*.

Aquesta importació, en anglés se la coneix com a *sourcing* i implica el
mateix resultat que la directiva ``#include`` en un programa C. És a
dir, el resultat final equival a si el contingut de *nomfitxer* hagués
estat escrit directament en el guió que l'importa.

Un possible ús és per permetre que més d'un guió comparteixi un matex
fitxer de dades o una mateixa biblioteca de funcions.


Exemple 19. "Including" a data file
===================================

    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        #  Note that this example must be invoked with bash, i.e., bash ex38.sh
        #+ not  sh ex38.sh !

        . data-file    # Load a data file.
        # Same effect as "source data-file", but more portable.

        #  The file "data-file" must be present in current working directory,
        #+ since it is referred to by its basename.

        # Now, let's reference some data from that file.

        echo "variable1 (from data-file) = $variable1"
        echo "variable3 (from data-file) = $variable3"

        let "sum = $variable2 + $variable4"
        echo "Sum of variable2 + variable4 (from data-file) = $sum"
        echo "message1 (from data-file) is \"$message1\""
        #                                  Escaped quotes
        echo "message2 (from data-file) is \"$message2\""

        print_message This is the message-print function in the data-file.


        exit $?



    File ``          data-file         `` for `Example
    15-22 <internal.html#EX38>`__ , above. Must be present in same
    directory.


    .. code-block:: sh

        # This is a data file loaded by a script.
        # Files of this type may contain variables, functions, etc.
        # It loads with a 'source' or '.' command from a shell script.

        # Let's initialize some variables.

        variable1=23
        variable2=474
        variable3=5
        variable4=97

        message1="Greetings from *** line $LINENO *** of the data file!"
        message2="Enough for now. Goodbye."

        print_message ()
        {   # Echoes any message passed to it.

          if [ -z "$1" ]
          then
            return 1 # Error, if argument missing.
          fi

          echo

          until [ -z "$1" ]
          do             # Step through arguments passed to function.
            echo -n "$1" # Echo args one at a time, suppressing line feeds.
            echo -n " "  # Insert spaces between words.
            shift        # Next one.
          done

          echo

          return 0
        }




    If the *sourced* file is itself an executable script, then it will
    run, then return control to the script that called it. A *sourced*
    executable script may use a `return <complexfunct.html#RETURNREF>`__
    for this purpose.

    Arguments may be (optionally) passed to the *sourced* file as
    `positional parameters <othertypesv.html#POSPARAMREF1>`__ .


    .. code-block:: sh

        source $filename $arg1 arg2



    It is even possible for a script to *source* itself, though this
    does not seem to have any practical applications.


.. _internal_uselessthatsourcesitself:

Exemple 20. Un guió (inutil) que s'autocarrega
==============================================

.. literalinclude:: /_scripts/self-source.sh
    :language: bash



exit
----

    Unconditionally terminates a script. ` [6]
    <internal.html#FTN.AEN9393>`__ The **exit** command may optionally
    take an integer argument, which is returned to the shell as the
    `exit status <exit-status.html#EXITSTATUSREF>`__ of the script. It
    is good practice to end all but the simplest scripts with an
    ``                   exit 0                 `` , indicating a
    successful run.



Note

    If a script terminates with an **exit** lacking an argument, the
    exit status of the script is the exit status of the last command
    executed in the script, not counting the **exit** . This is
    equivalent to an **exit $?** .






Note

    An **exit** command may also be used to terminate a
    `subshell <subshells.html#SUBSHELLSREF>`__ .




exec
----

    This shell builtin replaces the current process with a specified
    command. Normally, when the shell encounters a command, it `forks
    off <internal.html#FORKREF>`__ a child process to actually execute
    the command. Using the **exec** builtin, the shell does not fork,
    and the command *exec* 'ed replaces the shell. When used in a
    script, therefore, it forces an exit from the script when the
    **exec** 'ed command terminates. ` [7]
    <internal.html#FTN.AEN9425>`__


Exemple 21. Effects of *exec*
=============================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        exec echo "Exiting \"$0\" at line $LINENO."   # Exit from script here.
        # $LINENO is an internal Bash variable set to the line number it's on.

        # ----------------------------------
        # The following lines never execute.

        echo "This echo fails to echo."

        exit 99                       #  This script will not exit here.
                                      #  Check exit value after script terminates
                                      #+ with an 'echo $?'.
                                      #  It will *not* be 99.





Exemple 22. A script that *exec's* itself
=========================================


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash
        # self-exec.sh

        # Note: Set permissions on this script to 555 or 755,
        #       then call it with ./self-exec.sh or sh ./self-exec.sh.

        echo

        echo "This line appears ONCE in the script, yet it keeps echoing."
        echo "The PID of this instance of the script is still $$."
        #     Demonstrates that a subshell is not forked off.

        echo "==================== Hit Ctl-C to exit ===================="

        sleep 1

        exec $0   #  Spawns another instance of this same script
                  #+ that replaces the previous one.

        echo "This line will never echo!"  # Why not?

        exit 99                            # Will not exit here!
                                           # Exit code will not be 99!




    An **exec** also serves to `reassign file
    descriptors <x17974.html#USINGEXECREF>`__ . For example,
    ``                   exec           <zzz-file                 ``
    replaces ``         stdin        `` with the file
    ``         zzz-file        `` .



Note

    The ``            -exec           `` option to
    `find <moreadv.html#FINDREF>`__ is
    ``                         not                       `` the same as
    the **exec** shell builtin.




shopt
-----

    This command permits changing *shell options* on the fly (see
    `Example 25-1 <aliases.html#AL>`__ and `Example
    25-2 <aliases.html#UNAL>`__ ). It often appears in the Bash `startup
    files <files.html#FILESREF1>`__ , but also has its uses in scripts.
    Needs `version 2 <bashver2.html#BASH2REF>`__ or later of Bash.


    .. code-block:: sh

        shopt -s cdspell
        # Allows minor misspelling of directory names with 'cd'
        # Option -s sets, -u unsets.

        cd /hpme  # Oops! Mistyped '/home'.
        pwd       # /home
                  # The shell corrected the misspelling.



caller
------

    Putting a **caller** command inside a
    `function <functions.html#FUNCTIONREF>`__ echoes to
    ``         stdout        `` information about the *caller* of that
    function.


    .. code-block:: sh

        #!/bin/bash

        function1 ()
        {
          # Inside function1 ().
          caller 0   # Tell me about it.
        }

        function1    # Line 9 of script.

        # 9 main test.sh
        # ^                 Line number that the function was called from.
        #   ^^^^            Invoked from "main" part of script.
        #        ^^^^^^^    Name of calling script.

        caller 0     # Has no effect because it's not inside a function.



    A **caller** command can also return *caller* information from a
    script `sourced <internal.html#SOURCEREF>`__ within another script.
    Analogous to a function, this is a "subroutine call."

    You may find this command useful in debugging.



Commands
========

true
----

    A command that returns a successful ( zero ) `exit
    status <exit-status.html#EXITSTATUSREF>`__ , but does nothing else.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ true
        bash$ echo $?
        0





    .. code-block:: sh

        # Endless loop
        while true   # alias for ":"
        do
           operation-1
           operation-2
           ...
           operation-n
           # Need a way to break out of loop or script will hang.
        done



false
-----

    A command that returns an unsuccessful `exit
    status <exit-status.html#EXITSTATUSREF>`__ , but does nothing else.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ false
        bash$ echo $?
        1





    .. code-block:: sh

        # Testing "false"
        if false
        then
          echo "false evaluates \"true\""
        else
          echo "false evaluates \"false\""
        fi
        # false evaluates "false"


        # Looping while "false" (null loop)
        while false
        do
           # The following code will not execute.
           operation-1
           operation-2
           ...
           operation-n
           # Nothing happens!
        done



type [cmd]
----------

    Similar to the `which <filearchiv.html#WHICHREF>`__ external
    command, **type cmd** identifies "cmd." Unlike **which** , **type**
    is a Bash builtin. The useful ``         -a        `` option to
    **type** identifies ``                   keywords                 ``
    and ``                   builtins                 `` , and also
    locates system commands with identical names.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ type '['
        [ is a shell builtin
        bash$ type -a '['
        [ is a shell builtin
         [ is /usr/bin/[


        bash$ type type
        type is a shell builtin




    The **type** command can be useful for `testing whether a certain
    command exists <special-chars.html#DEVNULLREDIRECT>`__ .

hash [cmds]
-----------

    Records the *path* name of specified commands -- in the shell *hash
    table* ` [8]  <internal.html#FTN.AEN9591>`__ -- so the shell or
    script will not need to search the
    `$PATH <internalvariables.html#PATHREF>`__ on subsequent calls to
    those commands. When **hash** is called with no arguments, it simply
    lists the commands that have been hashed. The
    ``         -r        `` option resets the hash table.

bind
----

    The **bind** builtin displays or modifies *readline* ` [9]
     <internal.html#FTN.AEN9621>`__ key bindings.

help
----

    Gets a short usage summary of a shell builtin. This is the
    counterpart to `whatis <filearchiv.html#WHATISREF>`__ , but for
    builtins. The display of *help* information got a much-needed update
    in the `version 4 release <bashver4.html#BASH4REF>`__ of Bash.


    .. code-block:: sh

        bash$ help exit
        exit: exit [n]
            Exit the shell with a status of N.  If N is omitted, the exit status
            is that of the last command executed.




.. rubric:: Anotacions


` [1]  <internal.html#AEN8607>`__

As Nathan Coulter points out, "while forking a process is a low-cost
operation, executing a new program in the newly-forked child process
adds more overhead."


` [2]  <internal.html#AEN8650>`__

An exception to this is the `time <timedate.html#TIMREF>`__ command,
listed in the official Bash documentation as a keyword ( "reserved word"
).


` [3]  <internal.html#AEN9009>`__

Note that *let* `cannot be used for setting *string*
variables. <gotchas.html#LETBAD>`__


` [4]  <internal.html#AEN9199>`__

To *Export* information is to make it available in a more general
context. See also `scope <subshells.html#SCOPEREF>`__ .


` [5]  <internal.html#AEN9289>`__

An *option* is an argument that acts as a flag, switching script
behaviors on or off. The argument associated with a particular option
indicates the behavior that the option (flag) switches on or off.


` [6]  <internal.html#AEN9393>`__

Technically, an **exit** only terminates the process (or shell) in which
it is running, *not* the *parent process* .


` [7]  <internal.html#AEN9425>`__

Unless the **exec** is used to `reassign file
descriptors <x17974.html#USINGEXECREF>`__ .


` [8]  <internal.html#AEN9591>`__

*Hashing* is a method of creating lookup keys for data stored in a
table. The *data items themselves* are "scrambled" to create keys, using
one of a number of simple mathematical *algorithms* (methods, or
recipes).

An advantage of *hashing* is that it is fast. A disadvantage is that
*collisions* -- where a single key maps to more than one data item --
are possible.

For examples of hashing see `Example
A-20 <contributed-scripts.html#HASHLIB>`__ and `Example
A-21 <contributed-scripts.html#HASHEXAMPLE>`__ .


` [9]  <internal.html#AEN9621>`__

The *readline* library is what Bash uses for reading input in an
interactive shell.



